one of the worries as we have is that
people may be sitting at home and they
have been told not to come into hospital
and they're ignoring symptoms which
otherwise they would have attended to
and we know that if we catch cancer
early in most cases we have much better
outcomes
[Music]
good afternoon and welcome to chasing to
cancer 2020 I'm Francis steed cellars a
senior writer at the Washington Post my
first guest today is dr. Siddhartha
Mukherjee he is a renowned oncologist
he's a Pulitzer Prize winning author and
he's also serving on Governor Andrew
Cuomo's Commission to rebuild New York's
economy in the wake of the pandemic
welcome dr. mukajee delighted to have
you I'd like to start by asking you
about the huge surge in cases we have
across some of the parts of the country
in the states in the south and southwest
particularly what's going on there is
America opening too quickly too soon to
unscientifically well I think I mean
some aspects of the surge were expected
so I think some of it is just the fact
that once you let the once you that
people interact there will be infections
I do fear that we are opening without
adequate masking an adequate protection
I'm extraordinarily worried that the
messaging that we've tried so
desperately to move into people's minds
over the last two months has not fully
penetrated and that is you know avoid
crowded spaces avoid closed spaces and
avoid contact and obviously if you're
ill yourself get tested and get isolated
and quarantined right now in the absence
of a vaccine and it would be with very
very few medicines that we have
available against ghovat 19 this public
health strategy is the best strategy you
can either you know basically isolate
yourself or you can isolate your
respiratory system by wearing a mask and
I think part of the problem is that
outside you know many many other place
many places I see photographs so people
have not been traveling outside New York
City but I see photographs of people
wearing no masks in close contact with
each other and I think that's a big big
big big problem in New York
I was up this morning and virtually
everyone is masked so I was going to ask
you specifically about New York because
you're serving in this commission there
um what does New York have now does it
have specific tools to protect against a
second wave are you worried about that
given what we're seeing and you know as
I said states like Arizona and Florida
and Texas so again we're using the best
public health measures that we know and
as a right now in the absence of a
vaccine and with very few medicines that
work the best public health measures are
the ones I described New York as you
very well know is opening in phases we
are now in a in the first phase of the
opening and businesses are now open some
businesses are now open in you know
restaurants are open on in in open
spaces and that's because we know from a
lot of data that most of the infections
virtually all of the infections with
Kovac 19 occur in closed crowded spaces
when you have intimate contact with
respire two droplets from someone who is
infected so I think the phase by phase
opening is actually the right way to do
things I think really emphasizing that
masking and isolation and a boiling of
crowds in closed spaces is the right way
to do things and if you don't do it I
think we will face a second wave which
will unfortunately you know if
we do another shutdown it will
the economy once again and that's what
we want to avoid I would implore really
implore the governors of Florida and
Arizona and Texas to take this extremely
seriously
you have mentioned vaccines a couple of
times and president Trump has talked
about rolling out hundreds of millions
of doses of vaccines by January even
some scientists subduction and thought
this was a possibility goal what's your
thinking here why do you think we might
have a vaccine and when do you think
that might bring us back to a sort of
normal way of life well so you know
most people who work on vaccines I did a
roundtable with the leading corona viral
assists and vaccine people recently you
can find it on the web most people think
that 18 months is a extraordinarily
ambitious goal but potentially
achievable so that brings us really into
the middle of the summer next next year
vaccines are extraordinary things
because they have to be not only
developed and tested but they also have
to be safe we cannot compromise on
safety and and also they have to be
deployed it's not just enough to have a
vaccine it is you need to give the
vaccine you need to have enough doses
available so that you can get real
immunity so I think the you know the
idea that we would have a vaccine by the
winter is extraordinarily ambitious I
mean is it possible I suppose it is
possible but we cannot we really because
vaccines are given to healthy people we
cannot compromise on safety and I guess
right now with all the vaccine hesitancy
there is that there doesn't even higher
burden on this burden on this vaccine to
be safe right
we've got people just trusting measles
vaccines and other that's right so that
makes it an even greater challenge as I
said in a vaccine a vaccine by itself in
a tube is not useful a vaccinated human
being is is what we need and and and you
know those are two different things we
need to rebuild trust in the scientific
system vaccines in the history of
humanity have saved millions of lives
millions of lives have been saved so we
need to get over the distrust of
vaccines the other good thing that's I
think it's important to emphasize is
that vaccines have been getting safer
and safer and safer every year and
that's because new technologies have
allowed us to make much safer vaccines
and were ever present before as you know
there's a lot of misinformation about
vaccines and that's because vaccine
vaccine
knowledge ease date back way you know
into the into the late 18-hundreds and
1700s so so this you know we have become
progressively able to create safer and
safer and safer vaccine so there's a lot
of misinformation about vaccines that
needs to go so that we can actually get
safe vaccines into the hands of people
that brings me to an audience question
Sylvia wolf in New York asks whether
there will ever be a vaccine for cancer
well Sylvia you know there is no such
thing as cancer as a single disease so
it is a multiplicity of diseases and
therefore I would say that it's
impossible to imagine a single vaccine
for cancer now let me give you some
examples there is a highly effective
vaccine developed by scientists against
one virus that causes cancer the human
papilloma virus that causes cervical
cancer and we know that that vaccine so
the so-called
HPV vaccine is highly effective at
reducing the risk of cervical cancer but
the idea that there would be a vaccine
against all cancers I think is unlikely
because every cancer is really a
different disease right it's become
increasingly hard for people to visit
their doctors to get screened to have
follow-up appointments what's your
greatest concern now when it comes to
treating patients with cancer well so
we've tried I think across the nation
we've tried to maintain schedules for
EEMA therapy and other life-saving
treatments for cancer patients as much
as we can I think where we've seen where
we've seen a drop-off has been in in in
cancer screening and I you know I can
let me emphasize that colonoscopy and
mammography are tested mechanisms of
screening and so people are afraid to go
to the hospital and we've seen a
drop-off of people coming in for routine
cancer screening and I you know the
catch
cancer early is a is a very very
important part of the way we treat
cancer and so we just have to wait and
see and encourage people to maintain
their regular screenings again with the
appropriate precautions that are
required to go to the hospital so it
brings me to another opiates question
this is from Leo Jones in Washington DC
and he tells a story that I think many
people will relate to he has a friend
who was recently recently died and Freck
from Co good 19 and he says he and his
friends suspect that the virus was
caught during a visit to a hospital for
chemotherapy so his question which I'm
going to read is should patients with
early stage cancers consider suspending
hospital treatments for a year until the
US has better control of the virus the
answer is no they should not do that I
think in most places in most cancer
centers the the team of outpatient
chemotherapy wards have been isolated
and intensive testing is deployed before
you can get chemotherapy so in fact I
know from our chemotherapy words the
outpatient chemotherapy words that
they're you know the levels of safety
are are incredible and enormous
obviously there are other parts of the
hospital and depending on where you are
in the United States where there are
Kovac patients and there but they're
really different parts of the hospital
it's very very unusual to have a
outpatient chemotherapy suite which is
where most chemotherapy is applied to be
commingled in any way with a word that
has patients with kovat in it in the
United States so I you know treating
cancer early and appropriately remains
an incredibly important goal and I would
I would discourage people from delaying
chemotherapy or surgical therapy or
radiotherapy for early cancers because
of worries about covert
other forms of cancer treatment that can
be done through telemedicine is that a
transition that you are seeing I've
talked to various other doctors
including ER doctors who talked about
telemedicine forming an ever more
important role here so I'd love to hear
from you about cancer treatment one of
the one of the major focuses of the
governor's panel in New York is
telemedicine it is very clear that
telemedicine is going to be part of our
future
and that is not only because of Kovac 19
it was going this way even before Kovac
19 but Kovac 19 has in some ways just
emphasized the idea over again I think
that the you know we need to get the
right kind of telemedicine and the idea
that that that I favor is a kind of
hybrid model in which you will have
maybe two out of three visits as
telemedicine visits and then one out of
the three visits being an actual
hand-to-hand or face-to-face visit it's
it's really important for me to
emphasize that telemedicine is not just
FaceTime with your doctor there needs to
be a wide infrastructure built it needs
to be accessible it needs to be
equitable it needs to reach minorities
it needs to reach places like rural
areas where you know you may not have
broadband access that's that's
compatible with telemedicine so there's
an enormous
there's an enormous amount of
infrastructure that needs to be built
but but but the answer is very clear I
think a hybrid model with telemedicine
and face-to-face medicine needs to be
built and that is just the way forward
so let's step back just into the lab a
little bit we've been talking about
treatment but we have this huge focus
right now on coronavirus and an enormous
amount of research going into that is
that going to hurt some of the
innovations in cancer at this point or
are we they've been delayed
do you see problems that in that area or
can they the two issues move ahead
symbiotically the
there has been a very concerted effort
from the NIH and from other societies to
make sure that the that cancer research
is not delayed there was a time I have
to say that that clinical trials for
cancer had to be slowed down and in fact
with treatment slowed down because we
had you know the hospital was
overwhelmed by coronavirus and this is
again a good reason to to be thoughtful
about this because if you you know
containment off of the Kovach 19 endemic
not only helps people with code 19 but
of course it helps people with any
medical condition so we are now we've
now restarted in New York at least at my
hospital restarted virtually every trial
the IRB czar functioning again a lot of
meetings are being done through through
the web but nonetheless they are still
functioning and laboratories are up and
running with new protocols to keep
social distancing and masking available
so we are back I would say mostly on
track but remember we are on Phase one
of the of the reopening right talk a
little bit more broadly about the health
care system as a whole how does the
virus changed how things are being done
you've talked a little bit about
telemedicine do you see other changes
that will be ongoing and potentially
beneficial that will emerge from this
situation yes so I think I mean one of
the things that's that's emerged is we
we've learned very quickly I think that
we need and that we need a strong
pandemic response team we've learned
very quickly again that we need to
strengthen the CDC and the FDA one of
the most crucial I would say one of the
most crucial problems and or challenges
for Kovach 19 was there was a 42 day
delay between the
section of the first case of covert 19
in Seattle and the widespread
availability of testing from the CDC FDA
or patients that delay should you know
really put us back in terms of being
able to track and trace and isolate
people and by the time the testing kits
were widely available
you know the endemic had already spread
in the United States so we've learnt
lessons there as I said there are very
sobering lessons one more lesson is that
the current system by which we stop file
and and give personal protective
equipment to doctors facing a pandemic
was not in the right place many doctors
and nurses as you know were infected
some some of them have unfortunately
died this was it was it was a huge
tragedy and so that's another thing
we've learned that we really really need
in the middle of a pandemic to have
clear guidelines and adequate equipment
for doctors and nurses to protect
themselves and of course for patients to
be protected as well and this is key of
course going ahead with cancer treatment
as well that all these investments in
broad issues will become important as
well and how we deal with cancer going
ahead right not just individual
treatment but looking at these public
health aspects and bring making sure
minorities are brought in for treatment
absolutely I mean you know there has
been a an enormous effort preceding
covert to ensure that treatment was
equitable I mean the the non equitable
treatment for African Americans versus
non African Americans or Hispanics
Persis non-hispanics has been very
widely studied and noted in cancer and
so you know this has been widely studied
widely noted
there have been multiple panels and
commissions who try to correct it I
believe it will be corrected but if
anything the Cobra pandemic has made it
very clear that healthcare healthcare
and equities are an incredibly important
issue to address as we move forward into
the next months ahead so I think I have
time for one last question and that's
really about the you work at Columbia
your your training the next generation
of students who will go off and be
oncologists and do their own work in the
midst of a pandemic how are you
preparing them to be the future
oncologists we all need to go out in
such a stress stressful situation and
face and help people dealing with this
terrible disease well I think it's it's
it's reminding people I mean the Kovach
pandemic has reminded people that health
is an incredibly important part of the
infrastructure of the nation are you
know without health you can't have a
functioning economy without health care
appropriately delivered you can't have a
functioning economy and a functioning
populace so if anything I found that the
students are more energized they're
giving more of their time many of them
have volunteered in various capacities
during the pandemic which is a very
encouraging sign
they're afraid I think but the one thing
that that that's been very clear is that
you know if anything the pandemic has
convinced us that without adequate
health care an adequate distribution of
care you know we can't function as an
economy and we can't function as a
nation
so there's
thank you so much I didn't mean to
interrupt that last sentence but thank
you so much for joining us that's a
great note to finish on we have a short
video an hour and another segment and
then I'll be back with dr. Otis Brawley
so please stay tuned after the next
segment thank you thank you
[Music]
Herr Richardson Heron Pfizer's chief
patient officer and it's really great to
be here today with me a suit peshan the
president and CEO of the Alliance for
aging research now sue is here with me
today to address one of the biggest
blind spots in cancer and that it is age
you know while access to and delivery of
quality cancer care is not a new issue
the conversation to date has largely
excluded older people as a distinct and
vulnerable population but we all know
that age is one of the greatest
respecters for developing cancer and and
issues faced by older people are only
further exacerbated by a person's race
socioeconomic status anand of where they
live and as was just mentioned study
after study shows that older people are
not receiving at optimal care as well as
those racial and ethnic backgrounds and
this has serious implications ranging
from a greater risk of experiencing
decreased quality of life - Donnie
prematurely from certain diseases and
then on top of this the data clearly
show that older African Americans are
more likely to die of cancer than older
white Americans you know at this time of
when racism is at the center of our
nation's conversation change must come
bias is must and we must strive for the
highest quality outcomes for all
Americans regardless of their race or
their age so sue I just want to say
thank you again for joining me today for
this very important discussion let's
jump right in what are some of the
reasons older people may not be
receiving standard treatments thank you
so much for having me and that's a great
question
the kovat 19 pandemic has really brought
to light in dramatic and tragic ways
health care inequities and disparities
that older adults face people aged 65
and older make up 80% of all covered 19
deaths of the vast majority and some
people will say well everybody dies
but coded 19 is really an extra
something it's highly infectious and
deadlier in older people and this
dismissive attitude towards older people
and first for me really isn't new a
prism is common and coded 19 has just
revealed it a little bit more and it's
led to the marginalization of older
people within our communities and you
know the truth really is thankfully all
of us are living longer healthier and
more active lives so we just have to ask
ourselves why is it that our loved ones
65 and older are not receiving the best
care we can offer particularly when it
comes to cancer you know when I think I
think the answer is it's complicated
it's a problem that spans challenges in
our medical our societal and our policy
arenas yes that is exactly right dr.
Dara older people aren't represented at
the rates they should be in cancer
clinical trials and that makes it harder
for clinicians
on the available evidence a few years
back the FDA did an analysis of
registered cancer trials and they found
that only about 40% of trial
participants were age 65 and older and
that's compared with them representing
about 60% of the overall population with
cancer also about half of older people
have at least one chronic condition on
top of their having cancer so
understanding how additional chronic
conditions can impact cancer treatment
is really important
older adults are individuals and so
there's a need for individualized care
decisions a one-size-fits-all approach
doesn't really work one person might be
focused on getting rid of their cancer
no matter what the side effects or risk
might be well another one might want to
make sure they're able to reach a family
occasion free of discomfort ideally the
healthcare team should support a
patient's access to the care that they
want whether interventional or
palliative age bias as well as race and
cultural biases may impact whether
critical discussions about treatment
goals and decision making are taking
place between patients and their
healthcare providers and that really
needs to get recognized and fixed yeah
you know we take it all in together it's
really difficult for older people to get
the care they need and deserve so in
your opinion what can we do to fix the
problem yes let's focus on solutions so
first we really need to increase the
number of older people participating in
clinical trials for all types of
conditions that impact them but also for
certainly for cancer and we can learn
from the European Medicines Agency about
how their geriatric medicine strategy
has improved data gathering on older
people and if this model would work in
the United States with the FDA then we
have to support our healthcare
practitioners to use better clinical
tools for older adults such as geriatric
assessments and those tools help to
fully evaluate the person
at an individual level and that helps
support the treatment decisions based on
their goals and their values and last we
really need to support improved access
to affordable high-quality health care
well all of those are fabulous and great
points sue and although one thing we
know for sure is that cancer does not
discriminate and neither should cancer
care
that's why Pfizer is working with the
cancer community to tackle these issues
and identify solutions for example we're
partnering with the Association of
Community Cancer Centers to develop a
self assessment tool for healthcare
professionals to identify areas for
improvement in the care of people over
65 and and from there we'll be
developing resources to address the many
gaps and we're also very proud to be
partnering with patient organizations to
expand information and resources to
support the needs of older people living
with cancer and their caregivers
including a focus on people of color so
I've really enjoyed the conversation
immensely but we are at time so I'd like
to again extend our heartfelt thank you
to you sue for chatting with me today
the bottom line is is more needs to be
done to address the systemic
shortcomings that impact cancer care as
we age and certainly the time is now for
all of us to work together to tackle
this complicated issue on all fronts we
can and we must do better for our
families our friends and our own future
so thank you again sue that concludes
this second the program will continue in
a moment with a video introducing the
next segment thank you
[Music]
you
good afternoon if you're just joining us
at chasing cancer 2020 I'm Francis steed
cellars a senior writer at the
Washington Post joining me now is dr.
Otis Brawley he is a former president of
the American Cancer Society and he's now
a Bloomberg distinguished professor of
medicine at Johns Hopkins he's here to
talk to us in particular about
disparities in healthcare and dr.
Brawley welcome one other thing that's
become very clear during this pandemic
and at this watershed moment in terms of
red racial justice is how
african-americans and other minorities
have fared so badly in the kovat
epidemic can you tell us what gaps this
is revealed in the American healthcare
system yes thank you for having me
the Cova de pandemic really exposed a
gaping wound in American society it's
really based on socio economics the
people who could not shelter in place
the people who still had to go to work
were people who are of lower
socioeconomic status many of those jobs
are held by blacks and Hispanics and
many of our big cities and those people
were still exposed to the coronavirus
they couldn't shelter in place those
folks also had many comorbid diseases
that we see folks of lower socioeconomic
status having higher prevalence diabetes
hypertension cardiovascular disease this
created the perfect storm for people who
would get the disease their living
environment living in dense environments
allowed for increased spread and once
they had the disease they had other
illnesses that made outcome more likely
to be not good do these same disparities
exists in terms of prevention prevention
and treatment of cancer as well these
disparities are the problems that we've
been dealing with in the area of health
disparities and health equity and
they've really been defined for more
than 50 years indeed one of the things
we're really surprised about what if
some people seem shocked that these
disparities were happening
coronavirus they have been happening in
cancer they've been happening in
cardiovascular disease they've been
happening in the number of different
diseases over the years so that brings
me to a question from Holly Anderson in
Minnesota and she asks that we read the
question our systemic racism health
inequality linked how do we ensure
health equality for all people
regardless of race yes they are they are
definitely linked part of it is based on
education it's a number of different
things and sometimes we try to have
band-aid solutions where we just try to
fix one thing it's linked to lack of
education lack of understanding health
promotion and health prevention
activities it's not having a job it's
not having access to care once one has
insurance and access to care it's
sometimes discrimination in getting the
care itself you know a number of studies
out there to show that poor people have
lack of access to care for various
reasons the number of studies that show
that the greatest problem is
socioeconomic it's income and education
there are also a number of studies to
show that the largest district
population for cancer is actually white
Americans instead of blacks or Hispanics
so you mentioned hypertension diabetes
obesity these issues that are
comorbidities for kovat but also
complicate cancer treatment how do you
see the healthcare system adjusting to
trying to adjust
with these very fundamental issues often
that exists in the population before
people have a see a doctor yeah this is
actually a long-term problem and many of
us believe that we need to focus more on
preventing these diseases versus early
detection and diagnosis once they happen
I'm not against early detection and
diagnosis of the diseases but there's
not been enough emphasis in the United
States on preventing them from starving
to begin with if you look at Europe
Western Europe especially in Canada they
do a much better job in preventing these
problems from ever happening and then
you don't have to pay the incredible
expense for treating them so that brings
me to an audience question from chemist
in Washington DC who asks how does race
and ethnicity affect incidences and
survival rates of cancer well they they
correlate people who are black in the
United States have a lower survival rate
and a higher death rate is actually in
epidemiology the more important factor
the measure the death rate for blacks is
higher in cancer it's higher in
cardiovascular disease higher in
diabetes certain Hispanic populations
certain Hispanic populations also have
higher death rates in those diseases as
well and then the thing that we never
talk about is poor whites especially in
Appalachian the southern United States
they also have higher rates of death
from these diseases right so some people
talk about very high-tech advances the
very expensive high-tech advances we're
making in cancer being more available to
people who are well insured and are well
off what can we do to make sure that
cancer treatment is not reserved for the
wealthy you know I worry a great deal
I'm not at all opposed to improving
cancer treatments but I am very
concerned about the fact that a number
of people don't get those treatments the
best example I've ever known is
colleague of mine a few years ago did a
study and showed that 7% of black women
in Georgia who are diagnosed with an
early stage curable breast cancer get no
treatment once diagnosed with that now
that 7% get no surgery within the first
two years of diagnosis I should say that
is research that we've got any 1890s
that they're not getting in 2005 so yeah
I love the idea of new drugs and new
treatments but we have to make sure that
everybody can enjoy those new drug
new treatments I just gave you an
example of an old treatment that works
that people aren't enjoying today right
and right now we are hearing so much
about people who are avoiding hospitals
avoiding doctors offices because of fear
of the environment of uncoded in that
environment do you worry about late
diagnosis of cancers do you even worry
about a death toll to come because
people have avoided early screening and
early treatment you know we've actually
been able to model that and in March
April and May we really shut down
clinical treatment of cancer and we shut
down screening for cancer we are now
concerned that in 2022 2023 we're gonna
have a two to three percent increase in
death rate from breast and colon cancer
because of that shut down interestingly
it's not as much the delay in screening
its the delay in diagnosis and treatment
it's going to end up costing us some
additional lives perhaps ten to fifteen
thousand additional cancer deaths in
2022 and 2023 we have about 600,000 a
year in the United States by the way but
it's the delay in treating that is
causing the problem you know when we say
women should be screened for breast
cancer we see every one to two years if
they put it off by three or four months
that's not going to make a big
difference in in our statistics now if
we continue delaying screening well into
the summer and Beyond then we worry
about screening but right now the
problem is there's people who have a
symptom and are afraid to go to the
doctor and get diagnosed there people
who've been diagnosed were afraid to get
treated so age is a significant risk
factor factor for for cancer
do we see disparities in terms of
socioeconomic or racial disparities also
in the older age group when it comes to
cancer treatment all all older people
and we say older were talking about
people in their seventies and eighties
all older people have a challenge with
cancer poor people have a greater
challenge with cancer when they are old
what we learned about the healthcare
system and how it functions from covert
and how will that help us treat cancer
better in the future or how may it help
us well we've learned a lot about our
healthcare system and our public health
system and what some of the warts are
keep in mind if we had the healthcare
system of Germany and had reacted to the
coveted infection way the Germans did we
would have right now 36,000 deaths
instead of a hundred and twenty thousand
deaths if we had the health care system
of the South Koreans and had reacted the
way the South Koreans dead we would have
somewhere around 1,500 to 1,800 deaths
instead of a hundred and twenty thousand
deaths so this is very indite of our
health care system and our public health
system and in New York for example some
people died purely because the hospitals
were overwhelmed and overrun and in
extremis okay so when you're comparing
those health care systems you're talking
about something closer to a socialized
model of course Britain as well is
suffering it has a socialized model is
suffering during this epidemic but what
specific changes do you think could
happen here we have a very fractured
public healthcare system a lot of the
the risk factors you talked about
earlier on for cancer get lost at that
level where do you want to see
investments in the future in this
healthcare system health care system I'm
talking about an entire system from
prevention through early detection and
screening all the way into treatment in
our system we so focus on treatment and
don't focus on actually preventing
disease in early detection in Germany
and South Korea what they had was very
aggressive finding the people who had
coronavirus very aggressive sectoring
them off from the rest of the population
so that they did not spread it they had
very aggressive public health early on
that prevented problems now we don't
have that public health problem and then
we don't have good treatment once people
get disease as well
so what are the most exciting
developments you've seen recently in
cancer and a second part of this
question what are you most excited about
in the next five to ten years that you
see coming in cancer treatment I've seen
a number of things that make me
incredibly excited you know over the
last 40 years we develop a great deal
molecular biology that allow us to
understand exactly what cancer is and
what's going on with cancer that's
incredibly exciting that molecular
biology by the way allowed us to figure
out that we had a corona virus as a
problem and allowed us to trace the
corona virus some of that laboratory
technology for cancer is helping us
understand the corona virus as well as
well in terms of treatment some of the
immunotherapies that we have are really
a game-changer and are helping to save
lives and I'm not I'm someone who's in
the past criticized people for being too
excited about small incremental changes
but some of the immunotherapies are
actually good in terms of treatment I'm
incredibly excited about what I proceed
to be in increasing interest in
prevention of cancer I really do believe
that our cancer prevention efforts in
the United States need to be increased
dramatically and will in the long term
help us now I'm asking people to plant a
tree that they will never be able to
enjoy the shade from but if we start
practicing prevention today in 2035 2040
we will have less cancer we have
evidence to show there are third the 50%
of the cancers in the United States
today could it have been prevented if
we'd practice good cancer prevention in
the 1980s well I guess you don't get to
be an oncologist and to go into this
field unless you have some sense of hope
and and it seems as if your hope is
based in greater prevention moving ahead
I am much I my hope is based in
prevention and based in the fact that I
think people are now starting to
appreciate it but I also have hope for
treatment the immunotherapy work some of
the new technologies even some of our
chemo therapies as we learn more about
the molecular biology of cancer we're
actually designing drugs that are able
to interfere with the molecular
processes of cancer so I'm excited about
that too but I think the big bang for
the buck in the long term is going to be
with prevention dr. Brawley thank you so
much for joining us today it was
fascinating and I'm glad we could end on
a positive note there with some ambition
and optimism about what could lie ahead
for us thank you very much for joining
us thank you dr. mukajee who joined us
earlier this evening at this afternoon
for a wonderful talk as well about
cancer we have lots more coming at
Washington Post live in the next few
days including an interview an exclusive
interview with House Speaker Nancy
Pelosi and also an interview with
Arianna Huffington the CEO of global
thrive you can find all the details at
Washington Post live.com that's
Washington Post live.com please stay
tuned
I'm Francis DeSales and thank you for
joining us today
you